
THE GOODS
DEALS
SUBSCRIBE

HEALTH & FITNESS | MAY 11, 2023 10:21 AM
Pick 10 Physical Tasks You Want to Be Able to Do Until You Die
Peter Attia's "Centenarian Decathlon" offers an offbeat framework for longevity
An old man putting on a golf green.
"Play a round of 18" is a common inclusion on Centenarian Decathlon checklists.
Luis Davilla/Cover/Getty Images
BY TANNER GARRITY @TANNERGARRITY
A new book on longevity science by Peter Attia, titled Outlive, introduces a compelling framework for embracing our inevitable physical decline.

Attia — who cut his teeth at the Stanford University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital and the National Institutes of Health — calls his “Centenarian Decathlon” a template for training. Instead of bemoaning all the physical capabilities we’re doomed to lose at the end of our lives, we should cling to those we’d like to keep…and make a plan now, in order to do so successfully.

Attia’s Centenarian Decathlon
This is Attia’s sample Centenarian Decathlon from the book. Notice that it includes a mix of events that you’d typically associate with exercise and many that are just lifestyle actions — the sort of stuff we take for granted in middle age and earlier.

Hike 1.5 miles on a hilly trail.
Get up off the floor under your own power, using a maximum of one arm for support.
Pick up a young child from the floor.
Carry two five-pound bags of groceries for five blocks.
Lift a twenty-pound suitcase into the overhead compartment of a plane.
Balance on one leg for thirty seconds, eyes open. (Bonus points: eyes closed, fifteen seconds.)
Have sex.
Climb four flights of stairs in three minutes.
Open a jar.
Do thirty consecutive jump-rope skips.

Thinking about exercise through the Centenarian Decathlon means moving and exercising with maximal intention. It means making a list of the specific things you want to be able to do in your final decade of life and then backcasting to determine what you have to do on a daily basis now to achieve those goals.

The Centenarian Decathlon is a mental model Dr. Peter Attia created to visualize the most important physical tasks we want to be able to do until our final day.

Longevity consists of two components: lifespan and healthspan.

A longer lifespan is fantastic, but it doesn’t mean much if your quality of life (healthspan) is severely restricted.

While healthspan has physical and cognitive components, the Centenarian Decathlon is concerned with our physical capabilities.

So, what are the ten or so types of movement, whether it be activities of daily living, exercise, sports, or hobbies, you want to be able to do until you die?

Once you know what those things are, you can optimize your exercise routine today to enable you to be able to do those things in your final decade.

The catch is that we naturally lose strength and aerobic capacity as we age.

So whatever it is you want to be able to do at age 80, you need to be doing much more now.

For example, if you’re fifty now and want to be able to drop down and scoop up your 60 lb granddaughter at age eighty, you need to be able to goblet squat much more than 60 lbs today.

Killing False Beliefs
Most people believe that they will eventually become weak, immobile, and incapable in old age.

And they’re right.

The people who hold that belief will fulfill their expectations for old age.

But if you decide to wipe away that default belief, view yourself as an athlete of life, and modify your daily habits to prepare you for old age, then you can determine what your final decade will look like.

The cherry on top?

Implementing the kind of practices that will benefit you in your final decade will also massively enhance every single day of your life starting right now — physically, mentally, and emotionally.

From having more energy and reducing your risk of injury to feeling stronger and more stable, gearing your exercise towards the Centenarian Decathlon will improve your lifespan and boost your healthspan.

Case Study in Movement: The Japanese
Although chairs are gaining popularity, sitting on the floor is still common practice for meals and tea ceremony in Japan.

Because of this practice, many elderly Japanese folks are able to get up and down off the floor with ease — a capability we automatically dismiss as impossible for elderly Western people.

You don’t need to throw out your dining room table in exchange for a tatami mat and low table.

But it’s worth thinking about how you might modify your environment in order to maintain movements you don’t want to lose with age so you don’t have to carve out additional exercise time to keep them.

Use it or lose it.

Setting Targets for Your Centenarian Decathlon
Your Centenarian Decathlon will be unique to your goals, but should revolve around two key aims for which there is substantial overlap:

Delaying the onset of chronic disease (The Four Horsemen).
Maintaining the highest quality of life for as long as possible.
Once you understand the types of activities you want to be able to do in old age to maintain a high-quality life, whatever that looks like for you, the question becomes what combination of exercise will help you achieve these two goals?


--
he Horsemen
Now, onto the horsemen. In order of mortality rate, highest to lowest, the four diseases that kill the vast majority of those living in industrialized nations are:

Atherosclerosis (i.e., Cardiovascular disease, Cerebrovascular disease)

Cancer

Neurodegenerative disease (i.e., Alzheimer’s disease)

Metabolic disease (i.e., NAFLD, NASH, IR, T2D, hyperinsulinemia)

The three predominant categories of chronic disease, atherosclerosis, cancer, and neurodegenerative disease, all have strong links to underlying metabolic diseases. In other words, metabolic diseases are rarely the cause of death but are massive contributors to the development of the other three diseases which are.  

------

With exercise, we have four areas of focus:

Long-duration aerobic endurance (zone two)
Short to medium-duration endurance (anaerobic power and VO2 max training)
Strength and muscle
Stability, mobility, and flexibility
(I’ve written extensively on each of these topics, so I won’t go into detail here. See Annex A: Exercise Resources below.)

Reframing Exercise
The point of the Centenarian Decathlon is to fundamentally reframe how we think about exercise.

Exercise should not be seen as a way to lose weight or to look more muscular or toned in the mirror.

Yes, it can do both of those things.

But more importantly, it can enable you to live independently and to play on the floor with your grandchildren at age eighty.

It can give you the energy and strength to engage in your favourite sports and hobbies from now until your final days.

And it can delay disease and extend the number of healthy years you have.

Exercise is not a chore, it’s a privilege and a gift to yourself — both today and in the decades to come.

------
The Legendary Green Beret Who Lives Like a Modern Samurai
Tu Lam, the man behind Ronin Tactics, on waking up and preparing to die
A shot of Tu Lam's intricate back tattoos.
The term "rōnin" refers to a samurai who had no lord or master.
Courtesy of Tu Lam
BY CHARLES THORP @CHARLESTHORP
Tu Lam experienced war at an early age. Born during the Vietnam War, he was just a year old when his family was dragged from their home by North Vietnamese soldiers.

His mother managed to escape with him to the United States, where he was raised outside of Fort Bragg, with a stepfather and uncle who were members of the elite US Army special operations force, the Green Berets. Over time, his destiny felt clear: enlist and protect those who felt helpless, as he once had. But that path truly came into focus when a young Lam was introduced to the ancient samurai moral code of bushidō.

Lam had a natural interest in learning the “Way of the Warrior,” which was developed in feudal Japan. Thus began a lifelong commitment to self-improvement and discipline that ran through his 23 years in the US Army, starting with the 82nd Airborne Division and ending with the Green Berets.

Following his military service, Lam created Ronin Tactics, embracing the term for a samurai warrior with no master. Through this company, he distributes gear, instruction and training videos to a worldwide audience. The tutorials became so popular that Activision recently tapped Lam to have his own character in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 called Ronin. 

Here, Lam shares some of his advice for living like a modern samurai in this age. His advice appears as told to InsideHook contributor Charles Thorp, and has been edited and condensed for clarity.


Rise before the sun
“It is said that the samurai would wake up, wash their bodies and then set an intention between the moments between darkness and light. So that is what I do. I wake up at four in the morning. People ask me if it’s because I have trouble sleeping, and it’s exactly the opposite. I wake up at four in the morning because it takes discipline to wake up that early. In order to become better than you already are at anything, you must first be uncomfortable. So starting your day with a demonstration of pushing through that discomfort is a powerful tool.”

Set an intention
“Every day my fundamental intention is to become a better human being. I write this in my mind, during that time before the sun rises. This is a meditation in a lot of ways. I am sitting with my thoughts before the world has a chance to influence them, which makes them solid like a rock. There is a lot of power in setting an intention for your day and being proactive in how you attack a day. I have seen and experienced so many people who start their day by being reactive, where they’re are already on their back foot.

On one side, you have someone woken up by the alarm clock, feeling anxious that they are running behind, then perhaps getting upset in traffic by another person, and wanting to fight a stranger because of some gesture they made. On the other side, you have someone who woke up before the day began, made an intention that they weren’t going to let outside forces upset them, and then drove with efficiency and calm. Which one of these people is going to have a better day?”

How to Perform the Ultimate Animal Kingdom Workout
How to Perform the Ultimate Animal Kingdom Workout
Move like a frog, leopard or kangaroo with this 12-move guide

Sharpen your sword
“The samurais ruled the land in the way of two swords. They trained day and night. Those two swords could be considered your body and your mind, and the strength of both of them is important. I start my day with three hours of physical training, with a lot of cardiovascular work. Depending on my goals my evening training can look differently. These days I am doing a lot of strength training. 

You need to reinforce a strong mind with a strong body. If you have a weak-ass body you are going to have a weak-ass mind, and then you will have a weak-ass life. I find that too often people in the Western world are focused solely on going to the gym to get jacked. But none of them are training their mind. You train your mind by sitting with your thoughts and exercising control over them. 

I have learned through experience that the body will quit on you before the mind does. That’s why you need a strong mind. One of the practices that I think helps with this strength is cold plunging. This is because it taps into our instinctual fight or flight response. Having the ability to train yourself to react in strength rather than running away, and having the chance to do that often is profoundly powerful. After a few minutes in there, I find that the fog from my mind lifts. My mind becomes clear like the water.”

Pursue mushin
“Mushin is a state of no mind where your body is moving free from thoughts. People like to compare mushin to muscle memory, and in a way that is accurate, but more deeply, it’s that separation between mind and body. This is important because when those crucial moments happen, whether it’s a martial arts battle or a gunfight, you’re able to transcend past fear. Your mind is able to operate freely without overreaction to the potential harm of the body, and just as clearly as having a conversation in your kitchen, you are able to process what is happening. 

This comes from practice in many different scenarios, and I pursue it in my training with weapons. My guns have laser training bullets, which help me practice manipulations and firing them with accuracy. I studied Filipino Kali when I was in the Philippines, which is fighting with dual sticks. I wanted to continue to wield two swords, so I had a respected sword maker in Japan make me two custom blades that I call Heaven and Earth. They are able the same size as Kali sticks. I practice those often.”


Prepare to die
“In the teachings of bushidō, which is the way of the warrior and the ancient code of the samurai, one of the elements is to be ready to accept death. Being ready to die for something higher than yourself. I found something higher than myself when I joined the military and eventually made it into the special forces. That mindset helped me make it into these elite teams, because I was ready to lay more on the line than the others around me. During those screening processes and boot camp they are going to take you to your breaking point, then fix you up just enough to get you back on the field, and then try to break you again.

Ranger School had a high attrition rate. I remember one particular exercise where we were dropped into Fort Benning in Georgia in the middle of summer and we did a 18-mile long force march where we were running with a 65-pound rucksack. I was given a machine gun that had no sling, so I had to cradle it in my arms, which made it difficult to reach my water canteen. I was naive at that point in my career, and I was wearing brand-new boots on that march. By the time we were coming to the end, I had no skin on the back of my feet at all.

It was about a thousand meters out from our target when I started to get heat exhaustion. I was blacking out, and starting to pass out. We were supposed to maintain an arm’s length from the soldier in front of us. I heard a voice that wanted me to quit. I think I was at a point of insanity. I punched myself in the face, because my body was shutting down and I had to prevent that from happening by any means necessary. I thought I was going to die, and I could very well have. I made it.” 

A modern samurai protects those who need it
“The samurai were originally enlisted to protect the local people from attack, and served their lord, called a daimyo. They protected people from bandits and thieves. They did that with the way of two swords. That’s what I did when I enlisted in the Army and joined the special forces. I was there to serve my country and protect our homeland. But even more than that, I felt in service to God when we were able to save people from enslavement or worse at the hands of evil people. 

One mission that encapsulated that experience for me was in 1998 when we helicoptered into Laos. There were hundreds of landmines that had been dropped by the US on the jungle floor during the time of war, and children had been playing in the minefields. We were there to find and remove the mines. My family had escaped the Vietnam War when I was just a kid, so I had a special compassion for these kids. I had grown up in a grass hut, and I had struggled with getting enough food. I was glad that we were there, and that during that deployment we were able to build a school as well as reroute a water supply to help them have better access.

I was able to go on a number of missions like that as a Green Beret. It is important to stand up for those who can’t stand up for themselves, and that is the way of a samurai.”

Stand by a code
“I didn’t understand what the bushidō code truly was when I first was introduced to it as a young child. How could you grasp a concept so vast? The book Hagakure describes early thoughts on samurai and bushidō, which I had as guidance. I remember when I first shipped out with the special forces, carrying out missions to help people. I felt like that was the way of the warrior.  A samurai fights for something beyond themselves. Being a samurai means living your life with a code. Living with honor and purpose, while seeking perfection.
