The Basics
The timing in Morse code is based around the length of one "dit" (or "dot" if you like). 
From the dit length we can derive the length of a "dah" (or "dash") and the various pauses:

Dit: 1 unit
Dah: 3 units
Intra-character space (the gap between dits and dahs within a character): 1 unit
Inter-character space (the gap between the characters of a word): 3 units
Word space (the gap between two words): 7 units
Words per Minute
Proficiency in Morse code is measured in how many words per minute someone can send or receive. 
This seems a tricky concept given that you can send more short words per minute than long ones. 
The work-around is to standardise on the word "PARIS" as the standard word, so if Morse is being 
sent at 20 words per minute (or "20 wpm") then the word "PARIS" (or, more precisely "PARIS " with a space on the end) 
could be sent 20 times in a minute.

The neat thing about "PARIS " is that it's a nice even 50 units long. It translates to ".--. .- .-. .. .../" so there are:

10 dits: 10 units;
4 dahs: 12 units;
9 intra-character spaces: 9 units;
4 inter-character spaces: 12 units;
1 word space: 7 units.
A grand total of  units.

Given this (and the fact that there are 60 seconds in a minute) we can therefore make a formula to find the length of a dit,  
in seconds for a given wpm speed, :

It's clear that this makes sense: we know that for 1 wpm (i.e. ) you must fit 50 dits into a minute and the formula says . 
As the speed () goes up, the length of  goes down (they are "inversely proportional") which also makes sense.

Farnsworth Timing
People learning Morse code often use what is called "Farnsworth" timing to make recognising the sound patterns easier. 
Rather than slowing down the whole sound, it is better to keep the character sounds at a moderately fast speed and just 
increase the gaps between the characters and words to give more recognition time. The speed of the characters 
are determined by the normal WPM speed () but the Farnsworth speed () determines the actual number of words per minute. That is:

Dit: 1 unit (or )
Dah: 3 units (or )
Intra-character space: 1 unit (or )
Inter-character space: 3 Farnsworth-units (or )
Word space: longer than 7 Farnsworth-units (or )
where one Farnsworth-unit is longer than the basic unit. How to calculate 
the inter-character space and the word space though?

Going back to the breakdown of "PARIS " above, we can see that given the characters stay at the  speed, 
the part that we need to stretch out is the 4 inter-character spaces and the 1 word space (19 units) and 
the part that needs to stay at the same speed is 31 standard  units.

The length of a dit is therefore the same as before (see ):

For the length of the word "PARIS " we use the slower Farnsworth words per minute speed, or . 
One word ("PARIS ") should take this many seconds:

The time for the 31 standard units in "PARIS " should be this many seconds:

Subtracting  from  leaves the amount of seconds for the inter-character spaces and the word space:

There are 19 Farnsworth units, so each one takes this many seconds:

Using  we can then look at the ratio of 

Substituting  into :

It's easy to check that if  then, using  we see  which makes sense.

Alternatively, we can substitute  into  to get an expression for  in terms of the two speeds:

We can check that if  then  works out the same as .

Although this derivation is a little different, you will find it comes out the same as the equations 
described by Jon Booom (KE3Z) in an ARRL article which Ronald L. pointed me to and which is about 
as definitive as I can find. ARRL is the (USA) national association for Amateur Radio.

I am a husband, father and foster carer

a principal research engineer at the IT Innovation Centre

a founder of SPYDERISK

an owner of a holiday home, a salsa teacher

and in my spare time I write and maintain this web site

Morse Code World logo
© Copyright Stephen C. Phillips, 2015-2022
Cookies │ Licences │ Donate

