
Patanjali describes the dynamics and power of the mind by selecting A precise term Chitta. Chitta is derived from the verb root Chitti. 
To comprehend, understand, realise or experience completely. Chitti Kitti sang gyane. 

The fact that the word for mind Chitta is derived from Chitti tells us the mind is both the means of and the conduit for understanding truth in its fullness. 

Through the mind, we become aware of reality within and without. 

The mind is a repository of all our thoughts, feelings, and memories. 
It's a storehouse of our likes and dislikes. 

We see the world and ourselves through the eye of our mind. When the mind is clear and peaceful, we see the world as bright and peaceful. 

When our mind is convoluted, our understanding of the world and our relationship with it becomes equally convoluted. Our concepts of good and bad, right and wrong, depend on the quality of our mind, as do our likes and dislikes. 

The quality of our mind in turn shapes our thoughts, speech and actions. 
Both the sage and the demon within us are the products of our mind. 
A luminous mind enables us to see and embrace the immortal omniscient being within. 

While a mind darkened by ignorance entangles us in the long chain of birth and death, with its incessant experiences of pleasure and pain. In other words, we shrink when the mind shrinks and expand when the mind expands. 

But in all circumstances, the minds inherent virtue, self-awareness remains intact. No force can rob the mind of its capacity to know and experience the reality within and without. 

Patanjali expresses this intrinsic ability by choosing Chitta over the many other words for mind in the Sanskrit language. 

The mind has the ability to 
- comprehend the object of cognition, 
- the process of cognition, 
- and itself as the Cognizant force. 

Because it has the ability to know its own essence, its powers and privileges, it is known as buddhi, the force and conduit of illumination. 

Manus - that which thinks
Because the mind is aware of the object of thought, the process of thinking and itself as the agent of thought, it is known as Manus that which thinks. 

Ahamkara - the ability to take on the qualities of the object - self identification
Because the mind has the ability to take on the qualities and characteristics of the object of its thought, it is known as ahamkara, the faculty of self identification. 

Mind - ability to know its
The minds most distinctive attribute, however, is its ability to know its own essence, its pure, pristine nature. The mind is intrinsically as pure and luminous as pure consciousness itself. 

See yoga sutra's, 354 and 355. Its discerning power is limitless. It can flow inward or outward. Despite this innate capacity to rule the objective world and to explore and master the vast universe within the mind suffers from lack of confidence in its own abilities. 

past deeds and experiences
This is because in the course of our personal evolution, the mind has become heavily influenced by the subtle impressions of our past deeds and experiences. Those deeds and experiences are contaminated by likes and dislikes. They carry feelings of anger, hatred, jealousy, greed, love, lust, pity, compassion and cruel. 

Every deed leaves a memory imprint
Every deed and every experience contains traces of doubt, fear, regret and guilt. And these feelings accompany every segment of our memory. Memories pertaining to our deeds and experiences are deposited deep in our mind. These memories. Subtle mental impressions agitate our mind from deep within. 

Mind is propelled by these impression
Propelled by these impressions, the mind thinks and acts. Impressions and the thoughts and actions propelled by them are endless. That is why we find our mind constantly chasing one object after another. It has almost forgotten how to be still and be aware of its thoughts and actions. 

Dream state
Mind collecting pleasant sensory experiencess
When awake, the mind is in the service of the senses, busily collecting pleasant sensory experiences and avoiding painful ones. During the Dreaming state, it buzzes itself with its own fabrications. When it is asleep, the mind casts a blanket of unawareness over its intelligence and busies itself holding on to that blanket. 

Entangled mind
These incessant mental activities further reinforce the subtle impressions. Thus, the wheel of subtle impressions and mental operations gains an ever increasing momentum. And the mind becomes ever more deeply entangled. Patanjali calls these mental operations ruthies mental tendencies in motion. These roaming tendencies affect the mind in various ways. They can be disturbing, stupefying or distracting. 

5 distinct states of mind
They can make the mind 
- 1 pointed and can lead it to a point where it is free of all thought constructs. In his commentary on Sutra 1, Vyasa identifies 5 distinct states of mind. 
- Disturbed shifta, 
- Stupified mood, her distracted, Vicks, Shifta 
- 1 pointed E tagra and perfectly controlled Neruda. 
Each of these states causes the mind to function differently. 

The mind is disturbed because deep within the elements of attachment, desire, anger, fear and doubt are active and the mind is operating under their influence. 

The mind is stupified, dark, dense and dull. Because deep inside the elements of worry, grief, dejection, and hopelessness are active. And have rendered the mind inert. 

The mind is distracted because disturbance and stupefaction are mingled with enthusiasm, courage, motivation, clarity, and purposefulness. And all these elements are randomly active. As a result, the mind is partly focused and partly dissipated. 
A mind caught in any of these three states lacks clarity. It has no confidence in its own powers and privileges. It is indecisive and is only half heartedly willing to act on its thoughts and ideas. It seeks validation from external sources. When propelled by a disturbed, stupified or distracted mind, our endeavours, no matter how noble, bear little fruit. 

these dysfunctional operations must be arrested
The fruit they do bear is invariably tainted by doubt, uncertainty and fear. It is a vicious circle. The actions and their fruits reinforce the subtle impressions that cause the mind to be disturbed, stupefied and distracted. As Vyasa states in his commentary on the first sutra, these dysfunctional operations must be arrested. 

This is where the quest for samadhi begins. With arresting the disturbed, Stupified and distracted mind, and by acquiring a mind that is 1 pointed ecogra and perfectly controlled Neruda. 

One pointed minds
The mind becomes one pointed when the elements of purity, clarity, and peacefulness are active, deep within. Acting under the influence of these elements, the mind regains its power of illumination. Satva. It glimpses its own inner luminosity. As its attention focuses on its luminous nature, it regains confidence in its unique powers and privileges. A1 pointed mind is stable. It no longer grieves over the past, nor worries about the future. 

The elements of disturbance, stupefaction and distraction have been put to rest. The mind is serenely active and flowing peacefully inward. Now the practise of yoga in its truest sense has begun. 

yoga practise deepens inward journey
As yoga practise deepens, the experience arising from it becomes increasingly refined and profound. As we will see in Sutras 142 through 150, this inward journey has four distinct stages, all of which are accomplished by A1 pointed mind. Finally, the mind acquires such a high degree of purity, clarity, and perfection that it is as brilliant as pure consciousness itself. See Yoga Sutra 355. 

Yoga - Back in original true nature
In this state, all subtle impressions are reabsorbed into primordial nature, Prakriti, and we are absolutely free of the minds roaming tendencies. According to Patanjali, this state is yoga. When we attain this level of yogic realisation, what happens to our core being? That is the subject of the next sutra.

-----

Sutra 3. 

Dada Drashtu Swarupe avastanam. 

Dada, then. 
Drastu, the seer 
Swarupa dwells in its own form (nature). 

Our core being is consciousness, pure, eternal and unchanging
Then the Seer becomes established in its essential nature. 
Our core being is consciousness, pure, eternal and unchanging. 
Consciousness is luminous and all pervading. 

Purusha - infinite unconfined by space
Purusha that which resides in the city of the body
Yoga philosophy calls it Purusha that which resides in the city of the body. The body is finite, but the consciousness residing in it is infinite, for it is unconfined by space. 

consciousness pervading the body is immortal not dependent on body, mind or senses
The body is mortal, but the consciousness pervading the body is immortal, for it is unconfined by time. Consciousness knows life and death for its intelligence is not dependent on the conduits of body, mind and senses for knowledge. 

Consciousness is the seer, the seeing power itself, no separation object, subject
It is the seer, the seeing power itself. It is the fundamental principle of pure awareness. Consciousness is an infinite and eternal field of intelligence, devoid of differentiation between subject and object. It is pure existence. Nothing, not even the sharpest mind, can fully comprehend this indivisible, self luminous intelligence. It is untouched by decay or decline and beyond want and need. It is perfect in every respect. 

consciousness has become so subdued
This is the great and glorious truth of our core being. And yet from where we stand today in the journey of life, we are completely at the mercy of our mind. At this stage in our journey, the luminosity of our consciousness has become so subdued it is unable to comprehend its own essential nature. 

Dormant Consciousness
Consciousness itself, its capacities are so dormant it must seek help from the body, mind and senses for its own self realize. Its intelligence is so thickly veiled, it feels its presence only within the confines of the body, and that only vaguely. 

comprehension has become so limited
Its power of comprehension has become so limited it is unable to see it existed before birth and will continue to exist after death. It has fallen victim to the conditioning of time and space. Our core being, although all pervading, omniscient and beyond want and need can move only with the help of the body, can perceive only with the help of the senses and can cognize only with the help of the mind. 

Consciousness has lost its capacity to experience its pure being
The seer can no longer see itself. It has lost its capacity to experience its pure being directly and now depends on the mind to show it its reflection. Before it can perceive its true identity, it must see and recognize its own image, a process mediated by the mind. 

consciousness, our core being can see only what the mind shows it
The validity of this recognition depends on how accurately the image is reflected in the mind and how accurately the mind presents that image to consciousness. In other words, consciousness, our core being can see only what the mind shows it. 

Consciousness is so intermingled with the mind
Practically speaking, it no longer has an independent existence. Consciousness is so intermingled with the mind that it knows and feels only what the mind knows and feels. The minds fear and doubt have become its own. The craving for pleasure and the aversion to pain now haunt our core, being as strongly as they haunt our mind. 

According to Patanjali, the cause is ignorance
The question of when and how self luminous consciousness became intermingled with the mind and so strongly identified with it, has long captured the imagination of philosophers and thinkers. According to Patanjali, the cause is ignorance. Avidya. 

Ignorance  vs Truth - the mind has appropriated the role of consciousness
According to Vyasa, ignorance is our strong attachment to what is contrary to truth. The discussion of when, how and why ignorance, through its veil over consciousness, leads us nowhere when we are already deeply entangled. But it is important for us to understand that consciousness has fallen into the domain of the mind, and the mind has appropriated the role of consciousness. 

Mind remains unaware of its conscious nature
As a result, the mind is accompanied by the properties of both consciousness and the objective world. Although it is imbued with consciousness, it remains unaware of its conscious nature. The mind is assumed the form of its perception, yet behaves like the perceiver. Everything's object and subject, the perceived and the perceiver has become its object. 

the mind must serve the purpose of consciousness
C Yoga Sutra 423. This painful condition must be reversed. Consciousness must regain freedom from the slavery of the mind, and the mind must serve the purpose of consciousness. 

Purifying our mind with 1 pointed mind and the minds roaming tendencies subside
We can reverse this painful condition by purifying our mind and making it 1 pointed, clear and tranquil so it can begin to flow peacefully inward. Eventually we reach the point in our inward journey where the minds roaming tendencies subside and the subtle impressions. Lose their grip. 

There is no longer anything in the mind that can distort or contaminate the light of pure consciousness reflecting in it. As soon as consciousness sees its reflection and recognizes its true nature, the minde purpose is accomplished. 

The curiosity to know who I am, how I came to be here, and what will happen to me in the future, vanishes. See Vyasa on Sutra 425. The mind is no longer tossed by its wandering habits, figuratively speaking, the mind and our core being remain next to each other, but our core being is no longer touched by memories and mental cognitions, for there are none. 

the SEER, becomes established in its essential nature
This is what is meant by the SEER, becomes established in its essential nature. With the exception of those established in the highest state of samadhi, none of us know ourselves apart from our mind. 

The concept of pure being as opposed to impure being makes no sense to us. For most of us, the idea of a higher and a lower self has no real meaning. But we do know we have a mind. Experience tells us the mind enables us to succeed in both worldly and spiritual endeavors. 

As soon as we gain mastery over our mind, the door to all achievements swings open. A pristine mind is our best friend. It enables us to explore external and internal reality. However, when the mind becomes entangled in its own fluctuations, it is neither the time nor the energy to discover its own immense power. It no longer sees any reason to undertake the quest for inner fulfillment and ultimate freedom. 

It is so busy shifting among the disturbed, stupified and distracted states that it has neither the energy nor the wisdom to lift the veil of ignorance. The mind is essentially groping in darkness 

only when its roaming tendencies are arrested. Its field of memory is purified, and it regains its pristine nature. Can it recognize and communicate with the immortal self. Luminous, pure being. With this experience, the intuitive understanding of our core being dawns, and this is when the minds purpose is accomplished. What happens when we do not arrest the roaming tendencies of the mind is the subject of the next sutra.

Sutra 4. 
Vritti Svarupyam itheratra. 

- Vritti the minds roaming tendencies, 
- saroop pium becoming one with form. 
- Eta ratra elsewhere. Elsewhere, 

the SEER conforms to the roaming tendencies of the mind. Our mental conditioning shapes our reality. It is an outgrowth of the subtle impressions deposited in the mind. 

subtle mental impressions
These subtle mental impressions shape our mind and add their unique color to. It we see the world in their light. The shape and color of our mind determines the shape. And color of the world we see. Our trust in ourselves, in our family, friends, society, religious practices, and ethical and moral values is determined by our inner conditioning. 

the mind defines truth in light of its subtle impressions
In other words, the mind defines truth in light of its subtle impressions. We then use all our resources to find truth as we have defined it. As explained by the previous sutra, if the building blocks of our inner conditioning are eliminated and the roaming tendencies of the mind come to an end, we regain our pristine state of mind. 

We see our essential nature pure consciousness and become fully established in it. Our experience of fulfillment and freedom no longer depends on whether we are rich, poor, young, old, religious or non religious. We have found our soul and know it is neither male nor female, human or non human, virtuous or non virtuous. It is pure being, nothing more and nothing less. 

As long as the subtle impressions persist, the roaming tendencies the engender dominate the mind. The mind is unstable and his perception of both pure consciousness and the objective world is distorted. We mistake our distorted perception for reality, a scattered and confused mind cannot see how elements such as fear, doubt, attachment, desire, anger, hatred, grief, love, compassion, happiness, piety and pride shape our outer world. 

Nor does it see how these feelings, which are mingled with the subtle impressions, shape our inner world. Rooted in our subtle mental impressions, our feelings and emotions grip our conscience. The light of our core being as firmly as they grip our mind. 

Entangled mind suffers from the changing conditions of the body, mind and senses disease
Practically speaking, our core beings established in these inner tendencies, and they're established in it. All the problems of our mind are now the problems of our core being. It suffers from the changing conditions of the body, mind and senses disease. Old age and death. 

We a composite of pure consciousness and a mind encumbered with numberless impressions, are perpetually fearful. Our power of discernment is so subdued that the question of whether these feelings are arising from our core being or from the mind is meaningless. We experience ourselves as thinking and feeling beings, nothing more. We are happy when our actions yield desirable fruits and miserable when they do not. 

We do not see ourselves as a witness or our body and mind as agents of our actions. We know ourselves only as doers, fully responsible for our actions and their fruits. As long as the mind is dominated by its roaming tendencies, pure consciousness is only a metaphysical category. Our comprehension of reality stretches only as far as our mind. 

That is why our mind has to be refined and restored to its pristine state, a process that begins with understanding and analyzing our mental operations. That is the subject of the next 7 sutras.


Sutra 5. Brittanya panchayat rishta rishta. 

- Brittanya tendencies that cause the mind to rotate. 
- Klista afflicting 
- a klista, non afflicting. 

Fivefold tendencies 
The tendencies that cause the mind to rotate are fivefold. They are either - afflicting or 
- non afflicting. 

When was the mind created? Who created it? Because the mind is timeless, the answers are beyond our kin. When did the mind and consciousness become indistinguishably intermingled? That is also beyond our comprehension. 

- Sometimes the mind thinks in a rational manner, 
- other times irrationally. 
- Sometimes it ponders with purpose, 
- other times aimlessly. 
- Sometimes it thinks randomly, 
- other times with intention. 

Some thoughts are 
- accompanied by love, 
- others by hatred. 
- Some are compelling and meaningful, 
- others vague and useless, 
- and the mind never stops. 

embedded subtle impressions are known as samskaras
Thought after thought rolls through it. Every thought, every mental movement makes an impression on the mind, and each impression contains the qualities and characteristics of the thought construct that created it. With each repetition, the impression becomes deeper and more pronounced. 

In yoga, these deeply embedded subtle impressions are known as samskaras. Some scourers are the products of our thoughts, and our thoughts are the products of our mind. Thoughts and some scars are born in the mind and live in the mind. As we continually reinforce these subtle mental impressions, they become so potent they dictate how in what the mind thinks. 

vritti samskara chakra - The wheel of thoughts and subtle impressions
This cycle, from thoughts to subtle impressions and from subtle impressions to thoughts is called vritti samskara chakra. The wheel of thoughts and subtle impressions. It has been revolving from time immemorial. In the case of a careless soul, it revolves with an ever increasing velocity. 

The purpose of yoga is to understand the nature of this wheel chakra, its direction and speed, and bring it to a halt. The state in which it comes to a complete stop is samadhi. The perfectly still well controlled state of mind. Most of our thoughts emerge in our mind without our being aware of where they come from and why.

We brood without knowing why we are brooding A scattered, untamed mind has no access to the vast field of some scars from which our thoughts emerge. Some scholars influence how our mind functions, even though they are themselves products of our previous thoughts. With willful determination, we can choose to entertain a thought conducive to our purpose and protect it from the influence of undesirable some scholars. 

Freedom of choice is our innate virtue, but it is up to us whether or not we exercise it. Although the mind is caught in the Vritti samskara chakra, the cycle of thoughts to subtle impressions back to thoughts. We have the ability to slow its momentum and eventually bring it to a complete halt. 

The mind is in constant motion now. It is here the next moment it is likely to be somewhere else. It is addicted to surfing. The wave of thoughts. 

5 broad categories of mind waves
These waves fall into 5 broad categories as detailed in Sutras 7 through 11. 
- Some thoughts are associated with the objects of the external world and are accompanied by the right understanding of those objects, 
- while others are accompanied by false understanding of them. 
- Some thoughts are purely imaginative. 
- Some emerge when we are in dreamless sleep and we are unaware of them. 
- Some emerged from the field of memory. 

All are the product of a disturbed mind, a stupified mind, a distracted mind, A1 pointed mind, or a relatively still mind. Except when it is perfectly still, the mind continues rotating. 

Thoughts agitate and spin the mind - vrittis the principle of spinnings
Regardless of the category to which they belong, all thoughts have a common characteristic. They agitate and spin the mind. That is why they're called vrittis, the principle of spinning. They take the mind for a ride. Thoughts manufactured by a disturbed mind spin the mind violently, thoughts emerging from a disturbed mind of the qualities and characteristics of the object that created the disturbance. 

Some thoughts emerge from A1 pointed relatively peaceful mind and are accompanied by an order of peacefulness. In other words, some thought constructs are easier on the mind than others. Some are pleasant, others are unpleasant. Some are conducive to our overall growth and development, while others are destructive. 

Constructive pleasant thoughts and destructive thoughts
In this sutra, Patanjali divides our thought constructs into two broad categories based on how they affect us. Constructive pleasant thoughts and destructive, painful thoughts. Understanding exactly what is meant by constructive and destructive requires that we examine the words Patanjali uses. 

Klesha and Aklesha. 
Both are derived from glacier translated as Affliction. The thoughts that afflict us physically, mentally and spiritually are cliche. Our thoughts in layman's language, bad thoughts, they block our growth and disturb us internally and externally, no matter how committed we are to a spiritual path. 

pay attention to the effect of our thoughts
If we fail to pay attention to the effect of our thoughts, we will make no progress. To a large extent, spiritual practice involves removing these painful thoughts and replacing them with constructive, auspicious Atlanta thoughts. The word glacier is more profound than the translation affliction conveys. 

Klesha
Glacia encompasses ignorance, mistaken self identity, attachment, aversion, and fear. See Yoga Sutra 2.3. Thoughts that contain any of these disturbing, painful conditions, or that have a tendency to lead to them are klista thoughts. Those that do not are Ukhta thoughts. We call them painful and non painful thoughts for the sake of simplicity. The systematic practice of yoga leading to samadhi begins with eliminating painful thoughts and replacing them with non painful ones. 

At the final stage, all thought constructs are brought to a complete halt and we find ourselves fully established in our pure being. Yoga practice often begins with asana and pranayama, but the ultimate goal is to attain mastery over the mind's roaming tendencies and elevate the mind to its pristine state, allowing it to bathe in the unalloyed light of pure consciousness. 

This is what Patanjali calls yoga and Vyasa calls samadhi, a state where our core being is established in its essential nature. In Samadhi, we know exactly who we are in isolation from our mind as well as in association with. 

It we know our relationship both with the external world and with our inner world. Thus, the mind plays a crucial role in yoga. The better we understand our mind, the greater our chances of succeeding in our inner quest. Understanding the mind includes understanding the dynamics of our thoughts as well as the subtle nuances of where and how thoughts originate. 

Patanjali devoted the next 6 sutras to enhancing our understanding of thought constructs, a clear indication of how important they are in our self discovery.





