can you make a summary of the following text: RxJs Deep Dive Course

- Instructor

Hello and Welcome
My name is Hans Schenker

I am a Typescript and Javascript Programmer
specialized in Functional and Reactive Programming 

a marathon runner and sports fan
I am excited to teach you everything 
I know about Reactive Extensions

- Course Goal

The goal is an advanced understanding of RxJs 
and the underlaying concepts

The course should help learners gain a 
comprehensive understanding of the RxJS library, 
its key concepts, and how to apply 
them effectively in real-world scenarios. 

Underlaying Concepts
- synchronous blocking pull versus asynchronous non blocking push
- functional programming
- functional reactive programming
- real-time processing 
- Introduction to RxJs, Javascript Reactive Extensions 

RxJs or is a library that allows you to write asynchronous programs using observable sequences. 

It provides a set of operators that allow you 
to easily transform, filter, and combine these sequences, 

making it easier to work with complex data streams. 
Rx is available in multiple programming languages including JavaScript, 
and the JavaScript version of Rx is called RxJs.



Reactive Programming (asynchronous non blocking)

Reactive programming is a programming paradigm that focuses 
on handling asynchronous data streams. 

In this paradigm, the program reacts to changes as they happen 
in an asynchronous non blocking way, 
instead of waiting for an event to complete 
in a synchronous blocking way.

Reactive programming relies on the concept of observables, 
which are objects that represent a stream of data over time.
 
Observables emit values over time, and these values can be 
- transformed, 
- filtered, and 
- combined with other observables using operators.

In a reactive program, the logic is expressed as a series of operations 
on the observables, which are triggered by events in the stream. 

These operations can be thought of as a pipeline, 
where data flows through each step in the pipeline 
and is transformed along the way.

Reactive programming can be used in a variety of programming languages, but it's particularly 
popular in JavaScript, where it's implemented in the RxJS library. RxJS provides a rich 
set of operators and tools for working with observables, making it easy to build reactive 
applications in JavaScript.

Reactive programming has several advantages, including 
- better scalability, 
- improved responsiveness, 
- efficient use of system resources. 

However, it can also be challenging to learn, 
as it requires a different way of thinking about programming. 

Nevertheless, mastering reactive programming can make it easier to build 
- high-performance, 
- real-time applications that can 
- handle complex data streams.


The RxJs Deep Dive course is aimed at providing learners with a comprehensive understanding of 
the RxJS library and its underlying concepts, including functional programming, functional 
reactive programming, and real-time processing. The instructor, Hans Schenker, is a Typescript 
and Javascript programmer with a specialization in functional and reactive programming.

RxJS is a library that allows programmers to write asynchronous programs using observable sequences. 
It offers a variety of operators to transform, filter, and combine these sequences, making it easier 
to work with complex data streams. Reactive programming is a programming paradigm that focuses 
on handling asynchronous data streams, and in this paradigm, programs react to changes as they 
happen instead of waiting for events to complete in a synchronous blocking way.

Observables are objects that represent a stream of data over time and emit values that can be 
transformed, filtered, and combined with other observables using operators. In a reactive program, 
the logic is expressed as a series of operations on the observables, which are triggered by events 
in the stream. Reactive programming is particularly popular in JavaScript, where it's implemented 
in the RxJS library, which provides a rich set of operators and tools for working with observables.

Reactive programming has several advantages, including better scalability, improved responsiveness, 
and efficient use of system resources. However, it can be challenging to learn as it requires a 
different way of thinking about programming. By mastering reactive programming, learners can build 
high-performance, real-time applications that can handle complex data streams.

in rxjs different operators capture different asynchronous and concurrency behaviors. 
can you give me a list of 20 opeartors and give me the behavior they capture
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


mergeMap: 
Combines multiple observables into a single observable, not maintaining the order of events 
but allowing for concurrency.

switchMap: 
Maps each value to an inner dependend observable, and switches to the new observable 
when a new source value arrives, 
canceling any previous inner observables.

concatMap: 
Maps each value to an inner observable and concatenates the results, maintaining the order of events.

debounceTime: 
Filters out values emitted too frequently and only emits the last value 
after a specified time has passed.

throttleTime: 
Emits the first value of each specified time interval and then ignores subsequent values 
emitted during the same interval.

distinctUntilChanged: 
Filters out values that are the same as the previous value.

scan: 
Applies a function to each value emitted by the source observable, 
accumulating intermediate results and emitting the final result.

buffer: 
Collects values emitted by the source observable into arrays and 
emits the arrays at specified intervals.

delay: 
Delays the emission of values by a specified amount of time.

retry: 
Resubscribes to the source observable if it emits an error, up to a specified number of times.

catchError: 
Handles errors emitted by the source observable and replaces them with a new observable.

take: 
Takes a specified number of values emitted by the source observable and then completes.

takeUntil: 
Completes the observable when a second observable emits a value or completes.

skip: 
Skips a specified number of values emitted by the source observable and then emits the remaining values.

startWith: 
Emits a specified value before emitting the values emitted by the source observable.

combineLatest: 
Combines the latest values of multiple observables into a single observable.

forkJoin: 
Waits for all observables to complete and then combines their values into a single array.

race: 
Emits the first value emitted by any of multiple observables.

timeout: 
Throws an error if no values are emitted by the source observable within a specified time interval.

finalize: 
Performs a specified action when the source observable completes or errors.



in rxjs you are not thinking about control flow with if or switch statements, 
you are thinking in data flows
In RxJS, developers approach programming differently than in traditional imperative programming paradigms. 
Rather than thinking about control flow with if or switch statements, 
developers think in terms of data flows.

In RxJS, observables represent data streams that can emit values over time. 
By using a combination of operators and observers, developers can transform and 
filter these data streams in a flexible and powerful way. Rather than using if or 
switch statements to control the flow of the program, developers manipulate the data stream 
to achieve the desired behavior.

This approach allows developers to create more responsive and scalable applications, as it 
allows for the handling of complex data streams in a non-blocking way. By thinking in terms 
of data flows rather than control flow, developers can create more modular and reusable code, 
with different parts of the application communicating through observables and operators.

Overall, the reactive programming approach used in RxJS encourages developers to think 
differently about programming, focusing on data flows rather than control flow. 
This approach offers many benefits, including better scalability and improved responsiveness, 
and is essential to creating powerful and flexible reactive applications.

can you give me list of operators that handle concurrency

Sure, here's a list of RxJS operators that handle concurrency:

mergeMap: 
Combines multiple observables into a single observable, maintaining the order of events 
but allowing for concurrency.

concatMap: 
Maps each value to an inner observable and concatenates the results, maintaining the 
order of events.

switchMap: 
Maps each value to an inner observable, and switches to the new observable when a 
new value arrives, canceling any previous inner observables.

exhaustMap: 
Maps each value to an inner observable and ignores any new values until the inner 
observable completes.

zip: 
Combines the latest values of multiple observables into a single observable, emitting only 
when all observables have emitted a value.

combineLatest: 
Combines the latest values of multiple observables into a single observable, 
emitting when any observable emits a value.

race: 
Emits the first value emitted by any of multiple observables.

forkJoin: 
Waits for all observables to complete and then combines their values into a single array.

buffer: 
Collects values emitted by the source observable into arrays and emits the arrays at 
specified intervals.

window: 
Collects values emitted by the source observable into a series of observables and emits 
those observables at specified intervals.

These operators allow developers to handle concurrency in a variety of ways, including combining 
and merging observables, buffering and windowing values, and waiting for multiple observables to 
complete before emitting a result. By using these operators, developers can create more flexible 
and scalable reactive applications that can handle complex data streams in a non-blocking way.

which operators can cause race conditions
-------------------------------------------
In RxJS, some operators can cause race conditions, which occur when two or more operations are in 
progress simultaneously, leading to unpredictable behavior. Here's a list of RxJS operators that 
can potentially cause race conditions:

merge: Combines multiple observables into a single observable, emitting all values in the order 
they are received. If two or more observables emit a value at the same time, the order in which 
those values are emitted by the merged observable is not guaranteed, potentially causing race conditions.

combineLatest: Combines the latest values of multiple observables into a single observable, 
emitting when any observable emits a value. If two or more observables emit a value at the same time, 
the order in which those values are combined is not guaranteed, potentially causing race conditions.

zip: Combines the latest values of multiple observables into a single observable, emitting only when 
all observables have emitted a value. If two or more observables emit a value at the same time, 
the order in which those values are combined is not guaranteed, potentially causing race conditions.

concat: Concatenates multiple observables into a single observable, emitting all values in order. 
If two or more observables emit a value at the same time, the order in which those values are 
concatenated is not guaranteed, potentially causing race conditions.

race: Emits the first value emitted by any of multiple observables. If two or more observables 
emit a value at the same time, the order in which those values are processed is not guaranteed, 
potentially causing race conditions.

It's important to be aware of the potential for race conditions when using these operators in RxJS. 
To avoid race conditions, it's often necessary to use additional operators or to explicitly control 
the order in which values are emitted and processed.

which operators handle backpressure
-------------------------------------
In RxJS, backpressure is a mechanism for managing the flow of data between the source observable 
and the observer. It's important to handle backpressure in order to prevent an observer from 
being overwhelmed with data, which can lead to performance issues or even crashes. Here's a 
list of RxJS operators that handle backpressure:

buffer: 
Collects values emitted by the source observable into arrays and emits the arrays at 
specified intervals. This operator allows you to control the rate at which data is emitted to 
the observer, preventing overload.

throttleTime: 
Emits the first value of each specified time interval and then ignores subsequent 
values emitted during the same interval. This operator can be used to limit the rate at which 
values are emitted, preventing overload.

debounceTime: 
Filters out values emitted too frequently and only emits the last value after a 
specified time has passed. This operator can be used to control the rate at which values are 
emitted, preventing overload.

sampleTime: 
Emits the most recent value emitted by the source observable at specified time intervals. 
This operator allows you to control the rate at which data is emitted to the observer, preventing overload.

auditTime: 
Emits the most recent value emitted by the source observable after a specified time has passed. 
This operator allows you to control the rate at which data is emitted to the observer, preventing overload.

take: 
Takes a specified number of values emitted by the source observable and then completes. 
This operator allows you to control the number of values emitted to the observer, preventing overload.

takeUntil: 
Completes the observable when a second observable emits a value or completes. 
This operator allows you to control the duration of the observable, preventing overload.

These operators can help you manage backpressure in RxJS, allowing you to control the flow of 
data between the source observable and the observer. By using these operators effectively, you 
can create more scalable and efficient reactive applications.

what operators handle timing
------------------------------

In RxJS, timing operators allow developers to control the timing and rate of values emitted 
by observables. Here's a list of RxJS operators that handle timing:

delay: Delays the emission of values by a specified amount of time. This operator can be used 
to control the timing of values emitted by the source observable.

debounceTime: Filters out values emitted too frequently and only emits the last value after a 
specified time has passed. This operator can be used to control the rate at which values are 
emitted, as well as the timing of those emissions.

throttleTime: Emits the first value of each specified time interval and then ignores subsequent 
values emitted during the same interval. This operator can be used to control the rate at which 
values are emitted, as well as the timing of those emissions.

timeout: Throws an error if no values are emitted by the source observable within a specified 
time interval. This operator can be used to control the timing of values emitted by the source 
observable and to handle situations where the source observable fails to emit values in a timely manner.

interval: Emits a sequence of values at specified time intervals. This operator can be used to 
control the rate at which values are emitted by the observable.

timer: Emits a single value after a specified delay. This operator can be used to control the 
timing of values emitted by the observable.

delayWhen: Delays the emission of values by a specified amount of time, based on the value 
emitted by another observable. This operator can be used to dynamically control the timing of 
values emitted by the source observable.

throttle: Emits the first value emitted by the source observable and then ignores subsequent 
values for a specified time interval. This operator can be used to control the rate at which 
values are emitted, as well as the timing of those emissions.

auditTime: Emits the most recent value emitted by the source observable after a specified time 
has passed. This operator can be used to control the timing of values emitted by the observable.

By using these timing operators, developers can control the rate and timing of values emitted by 
observables, allowing for more efficient and responsive applications.

what is the role of an Observable
----------------------------------


In RxJS, an observable is an object that represents 

- a stream of data that can be observed over time.
- emit values over time, and these values 
- can be transformed, filtered, and combined with other observables using operators. 
- a flexible and powerful way to handle asynchronous data streams.

The primary role of an observable is to provide a way to 
- observe and respond to changes in a data stream over time. 



Observables are also designed to be composable, meaning that they can be combined and 
manipulated in a variety of ways to create more complex data streams. By using operators 
to transform and filter observables, developers can create new observables that represent 
a subset of the original data stream or that combine multiple data streams into a single stream.

Overall, the role of an observable is to provide a flexible and powerful way to handle 
asynchronous data streams in RxJS. By using observables and operators, developers can 
create more efficient, scalable, and responsive applications that can handle complex 
data streams in a non-blocking way.


what is the role of an Observer
---------------------------------
In RxJS, an observer is an object that is used to receive and process the values emitted 
by an observable. The role of an observer is to provide a way to observe and respond to changes 
in a data stream over time.

Observers : 1 to 1 communication
are typically created by calling the subscribe() method on an observable. 
The subscribe() method takes an observer as an argument and returns a subscription object, 
which can be used to unsubscribe from the observable when it is no longer needed.

The primary role of an observer is to define what should happen when values are emitted 
by an observable. An observer can define three functions:

next(): This function is called when a value is emitted by the observable. The value is 
passed as an argument to the function.

error(): This function is called when an error occurs in the observable. The error is 
passed as an argument to the function.

complete(): This function is called when the observable has completed emitting values.

By defining these functions, an observer can respond to changes in the data stream emitted 
by an observable. Observers can be used to update the user interface, trigger side effects, 
or perform any other action that is necessary based on the values emitted by the observable.

Overall, the role of an observer is to provide a way to observe and respond to changes in a 
data stream over time. By defining the next(), error(), and complete() functions, an observer 
can react to changes in the data stream emitted by an observable and perform any necessary actions.


what is the role of a Subscription
--------------------------------------
In RxJS, a subscription is an object that represents a connection between an observable 
and an observer. The role of a subscription is to provide a way to manage the lifecycle 
of an observable and to control when and how values are emitted by the observable.

When an observer subscribes to an observable, the subscribe() method returns a subscription object. 
The subscription object can be used to unsubscribe from the observable when it is no longer needed, 
or to control the timing and rate of value emissions.

The primary role of a subscription is to provide a way to manage the lifecycle of an observable. 
When a subscription is created, it establishes a connection between the observable and the 
observer, allowing values to be emitted from the observable to the observer. 
When the subscription is no longer needed, it can be unsubscribed from the observable, 
terminating the connection and preventing further value emissions.

Subscriptions can also be used to control the timing and rate of value emissions from 
the observable. By using operators like take() and takeUntil(), developers can control 
when and how values are emitted from the observable, allowing for more efficient 
and responsive applications.

Overall, the role of a subscription is to provide a way to manage the lifecycle of an 
observable and to control when and how values are emitted from the observable. 
By using subscriptions effectively, developers can create more scalable, efficient, 
and responsive reactive applications in RxJS.

what is the role of a Subject
--------------------------------

In RxJS, a subject is a special type of observable that can be used to both emit and 
observe values over time. The role of a subject is to provide a way to create a "hot" 
observable that can be observed by multiple observers, while also allowing values to be 
emitted by external sources.

A subject 
is both an observable and an observer. This means that it can emit values like 
a regular observable, but it can also be subscribed to like a regular observer. This allows 
developers to create more flexible and powerful data streams that can be observed and 
manipulated in a variety of ways.

1 - n communication
The primary role of a subject is to provide a way to create a "hot" observable that can 
be observed by multiple observers. When a value is emitted by a subject, all observers 
that are currently subscribed to the subject will receive the value. This allows developers 
to create more dynamic and responsive applications that can handle complex data streams.

Subjects 
can also be used to create new observables by using operators like map() and filter(). 
By transforming the data emitted by a subject, developers can create new observables 
that represent subsets of the original data stream or that combine multiple data streams 
into a single stream.

Overall, the role of a subject is to provide a powerful and flexible way to handle data 
streams in RxJS. By using subjects, developers can create more scalable and efficient 
reactive applications that can handle complex data streams in a non-blocking way.

what is the role of a Scheduler
--------------------------------------

In RxJS, a scheduler is an object that controls when and how values are emitted by an observable. 
The role of a scheduler is to provide a way to control the timing of emissions and to specify the 
context in which emissions occur.

Schedulers can be used to perform a variety of tasks, such as delaying emissions, specifying the 
order of emissions, and executing emissions on a specific thread or process. By controlling the 
timing and context of emissions, schedulers can help developers create more efficient and 
responsive reactive applications.

The primary role of a scheduler is to control the timing of emissions. By using operators 
like delay() and interval(), developers can specify when values should be emitted by the 
observable, allowing for more fine-grained control over the data stream.

Schedulers can also be used to specify the context in which emissions occur. For example, 
by using the observeOn() operator, developers can specify the thread or process in which 
emissions should occur, allowing for more efficient and responsive applications.

Overall, the role of a scheduler is to provide a way to control the timing and context of 
emissions in RxJS. By using schedulers effectively, developers can create more efficient, 
responsive, and scalable reactive applications that can handle complex data streams in a 
non-blocking way.


what are main differences between imperative and declarative style of programming
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Control flow: 
In imperative programming, the focus is on how to achieve a specific task, and the programmer 
has to specify the control flow of the program, which means specifying the steps required 
to achieve the desired outcome. In contrast, in declarative programming, the focus is on 
what needs to be achieved, and the programmer specifies the desired outcome without worrying 
about how it will be achieved.

Mutability: 
Imperative programming typically uses mutable data structures, which means that the state 
of the program can change over time. Declarative programming, on the other hand, favors immutable 
data structures, which means that the state of the program remains constant throughout its execution.

Side effects: 
Imperative programming often involves side effects, such as changing the state of the program 
or interacting with external systems. Declarative programming, on the other hand, aims to 
minimize side effects and produce predictable and consistent results.

Readability: 
Declarative programming is often more readable and concise than imperative programming, 
as it focuses on what needs to be achieved rather than how to achieve it. This makes declarative 
code easier to understand and maintain over time.


Debugging: 
Declarative programming can be easier to debug than imperative programming, as it often involves 
fewer steps and less complex control flow. Declarative code is also less likely to produce 
unexpected results or bugs due to side effects.

Overall, the main difference between imperative and declarative programming is the approach 
to problem-solving. 
- how: describes the necessary steps to the desired outcome, how to achieve a specific task
- what: describes the desired outcome, what needs to be achieved. 

Declarative programming often leads to 
- more readable, 
- maintainable, and 
- predictable code, making it a popular choice for complex applications.

declarative style of programming is dealing with higher abstractions
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes, that is correct. Declarative programming is often associated with higher levels of abstraction, 
as it focuses on what needs to be achieved rather than how to achieve it. 

By using declarative constructs: such as 
- functions, 
- classes, and 
- modules, programmers can work at a higher level of abstraction, 
which can make code more readable, maintainable, and reusable.

Declarative programming also involves the use of 
declarative languages: such as 
- SQL, 
- HTML, and 
- CSS, which provide a way to describe the desired outcome in a concise and expressive way. 
By using declarative languages, programmers can 
- separate presentation (side effect) and logic (business logic), 
making it easier to create scalable and maintainable applications.


what are the problem solving patterns in declarative style of programming
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

In declarative programming, there are several problem-solving patterns that can be used 
to create more efficient and effective code. Some of the most common patterns include:

Map/filter/reduce: 
This pattern involves using higher-order functions like map(), filter(), 
and reduce() to transform, filter, and combine data in a declarative way.

Composition: 
This pattern involves combining smaller functions and modules to create more 
complex functionality. By breaking down a problem into smaller, reusable pieces, it becomes 
easier to manage and maintain code.

Immutability: 
This pattern involves using immutable data structures to avoid side effects 
and ensure that data remains consistent throughout the program.

Declarative languages: 
This pattern involves using declarative languages, like SQL or HTML, 
to describe the desired outcome in a concise and expressive way. By separating the concerns 
of presentation and logic, it becomes easier to create scalable and maintainable applications.

Pure functions: 
This pattern involves writing functions that don't have side effects and always 
return the same output given the same input. By ensuring that functions are pure, it becomes 
easier to test and reason about code.

Higher-order functions: 
This pattern involves using functions as inputs or outputs of other functions. 
By using higher-order functions, it becomes easier to create reusable and flexible code that 
can adapt to different scenarios.

can you give me an rxjs mouse drag and drop sample 
--------------------------------------------------------
import { fromEvent, merge } from 'rxjs';
import { map, switchMap, takeUntil } from 'rxjs/operators';

const draggable = document.getElementById('draggable');
const mouseDown$ = fromEvent(draggable, 'mousedown');
const mouseMove$ = fromEvent(document, 'mousemove');
const mouseUp$ = fromEvent(document, 'mouseup');

const drag$ = mouseDown$.pipe(
  switchMap(() => {
    return mouseMove$.pipe(
      map(event => {
        event.preventDefault();
        return {
          x: event.clientX - draggable.offsetLeft,
          y: event.clientY - draggable.offsetTop
        };
      }),
      takeUntil(mouseUp$)
    );
  })
);

drag$.subscribe(pos => {
  draggable.style.left = `${pos.x}px`;
  draggable.style.top = `${pos.y}px`;
});
In this example, we first select the draggable element from the DOM and create observables 
for the mousedown, mousemove, and mouseup events using fromEvent().

We then create a drag$ observable by using the switchMap() operator to switch to a new observable 
that emits the position of the draggable element as it is being dragged. Inside the switchMap 
function, we return the mouseMove$ observable, which we transform using the map() operator to 
calculate the position of the draggable element relative to the mouse position. We also use the 
takeUntil() operator to complete the observable when the mouseup event is emitted.

Finally, we subscribe to the drag$ observable and update the position of the draggable 
element using the left and top CSS properties.

By using RxJS, we are able to create a more reactive and declarative implementation of 
mouse drag and drop functionality, which makes it easier to manage and maintain our code.

in a declarative style of programming you declare what must be the outcomes to solve a problem.
Can you declare what must be the outcomes for a rxjs snake game
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 The snake can move around the game board in response to user input (e.g. arrow keys).

2 The snake can grow in size when it eats a food item on the game board.

3 The game ends if the snake collides with the game board boundaries or its own body.

4 The game ends if the player chooses to quit.

5 The game displays a score that increases as the snake eats food items.

6 The game displays a high score that is saved across multiple plays.

7 The game displays a game over screen when the game ends, with the option to restart or quit.

8 The game has sound effects and background music that can be muted by the player.

9 The game has configurable difficulty levels (e.g. speed of snake movement).



Can you now give a possible solution for these 9 requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 The snake can move around the game board in response to user input (e.g. arrow keys).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
arrange
-------
Given 	a board of 30x30 cells with a 1 cell food item and a 3 cell snake on it
And 	the user has started the game with a press on the space bar
act
------
When 	the user presses any arrow key and the game timer emits a value
And 	the user did not press an opposite arrow key
assert
------
Then 	the snake will move in the direction of the last arrow key

- observable that emits the current position of the snake, 
  which is updated in response to user input 
  - from arrow keys. We can 
  - scan() operator to accumulate the positions of the snake, and the 
  - distinctUntilChanged() operator to ensure that the same position isn't emitted twice.


2 The snake can grow in size when it eats a food item on the game board.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given	the snake position is the same position as the food item
When	snake head position is equal to food postion
Then    snake length grows in size

- observable that emits the current length of the snake, which increases when it eats a food item. 
  - map() operator to transform the positions of the snake into its length, 
  - and the filter() operator to emit only when the snake eats a food item.


3 The game ends if the snake collides with the game board boundaries or its own body.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given	the snake head collides with game board boundaries or its own body
When    the collision happens
Then    the game ends
And 	a message "game over" is displayed

- create an observable that checks for collisions 
  - combineLatest() operator to 
    - combine the observables for the snake position and length
    - filter() operator to emit only when a collision is detected


4 The game ends if the player chooses to quit.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given	the user presses th quit button
When	the click occurs
Then    observable that listens for the clicks will emit

- observable that emits when the player chooses to quit. 
  - fromEvent() operator to create an observable that listens for clicks on a "quit" button

5 The game displays a score that increases as the snake eats food items.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given	there is a score label on the screen
When	the snake head collides with a food item
Then	the score is updated and the length of the snake grows
- observable that emits the current score, 
  - which increases when the snake eats a food item. 
    - scan() operator to accumulate the score, and the 
    - distinctUntilChanged() operator to ensure that the same score isn't emitted twice.

6 The game displays a high score that is saved across multiple plays.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given	the game ended
When	when the game completed fires
Then	then the current score is save to the localstorage

- observable that emits the current high score, 
  can use the localStorage API to store the high score across multiple plays
  - which is updated when a new high score is achieved. We can use the 
  - scan() operator to accumulate the high score, 
  - distinctUntilChanged() operator to ensure that the same high score isn't emitted twice.

7 The game displays a game over screen when the game ends, with the option to restart or quit.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given
When
Then

To display the game over screen and handle restarting or quitting, we can create an observable that 
emits when the game ends. We can use the filter() operator to emit only when the game ends, and 
then use the concat() operator to display the game over screen and listen for clicks on "restart" or 
"quit" buttons.

8 The game has sound effects and background music that can be muted by the player.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given
When
Then

- observables that emit when certain events occur,To handle sound effects and background music, 
  we can use the Web Audio API to create audio contexts and sources,
  - snake eating a food item or 
  - the game ending. We can use the subscribe() operator to play audio files in response to these events.

9 The game has configurable difficulty levels (e.g. speed of snake movement).
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given
When
Then

- observable that emits the current difficulty level, To handle configurable difficulty levels,  
  - which is updated when the player chooses a new level. We can use the 
  - distinctUntilChanged() operator to ensure that the same level isn't emitted twice, and then 
  - adjust the game speed or other parameters based on the current level

with the BDD syntax: Given When Then,, how would you formulate these 9 requirements
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given-When-Then syntax of Behavior-Driven Development (BDD):
1
Given	a snake game is running, 
When 	the user presses arrow keys, 
Then 	the snake moves around the game board in response to the input.
2
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the snake eats a food item, 
Then 	its size grows by one.
3
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the snake collides with the game board boundaries or its own body, 
Then 	the game ends.
4
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the player chooses to quit, Then the game ends.
5
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the snake eats a food item, 
Then 	the score increases by one.
5
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the player achieves a new high score, 
Then 	it is displayed and saved for future plays.
6
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the game ends, 
Then 	a game over screen is displayed with the options to restart or quit.
7
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	certain events occur         - such as eating a food item or the game ending, 
Then 	sound effects and background music are played.
8
Given 	a snake game is running, 
When 	the player chooses a new difficulty level, 
Then 	the game speed or other parameters adjust accordingly.

By formulating these requirements using the Given-When-Then syntax, 
we can create a more structured and organized approach to developing the game, 

- make it easier to communicate requirements and 
- track progress throughout the development process.


given these requirements which one of these do you consider as beeing an input observables

Based on the requirements listed earlier, here are the ones that I consider to be input observables:

The user input from arrow keys that controls the movement of the snake.
The position of food items on the game board that the snake can eat.
The player's choice of difficulty level.
These input observables are used to trigger changes and updates within the game, such as moving the snake, growing its size, and adjusting the game speed or other parameters. By using input observables, we can create a more reactive and dynamic game that responds to user input and adapts to changing game conditions.


which ones do you think will  track the changes and updates within the game
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on the requirements listed earlier, here are the ones that I consider to 
track the changes and updates within the game:

(snake move: triggered by timer and user arrows -> change snake position
The position of the snake on the game board, which updates as the snake moves around.

(snake colliding with food: triggered by snake moves -> triggers snake length grow)
The length of the snake, which updates as the snake eats food items.

(players score: triggered by snake length grow)
The player's score, which updates as the snake eats food items.

(high score: triggerd by players score)
The high score, which updates when a new high score is achieved.

(game state: triggered by game over)
The game state, which updates when the game ends or is restarted.

(game sound: triggered by collision with borders, itself or food)
The sound effects and background music, which play in response to certain game events.

These observables track the changes and updates within the game and 
trigger other actions, such as displaying the score, 
ending the game when the snake collides with the game board, or playing audio files. 
By tracking these changes and updates within the game using observables, 
we can create a more reactive and responsive game that can adapt to different user actions 
and game conditions.

how would you describe the data flow within the snake game
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The data flow within the snake game follows a reactive and declarative programming approach. 
User inputs, such as arrow key presses, are captured as input observables, which trigger changes 
in the game state and other observables. These observables track and update the position of 
the snake, its length, the player's score, and the high score, as well as triggering sound 
effects and background music.

The game state is managed using observables, which respond to changes in the input observables 
and other game events, such as the snake eating a food item or colliding with the game board. 
These observables emit values that are transformed, filtered, and combined using operators to 
achieve the desired outcomes, such as displaying the score, ending the game, or adjusting the 
game speed based on the difficulty level.

The data flows through the observables in a pipeline, where each operator applies a specific 
transformation or filter to the data before passing it on to the next operator. This allows 
for a more modular and composable approach to programming, where changes and updates to one 
part of the game can be easily propagated through the data flow to affect other parts of the game.

By using a reactive and declarative approach to data flow, the snake game can be more flexible, 
extensible, and maintainable over time, allowing for new features and functionality to be added 
with minimal changes to the existing code.

do you think it is possible to visually display the data flow
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yes, it is possible to visually display the data flow within the snake game 

inputs:		- game ticks |
                             |-> mouse move
		- arrow keys |

triggers:	- mouse move -> mouse position 
				check collison border -> play game over sound
				check collision body -> play game over sound
                                check food item -> play food sound

		- mouse position -> snake length 

           	- snake length -> player score 

		- player score -> player high score 

- using a diagram or graph that shows the 
  - input observables: game tick, user arrows trigger
  - mouse move -> triggers mouse position
    mouse move check collision
    mouse move check food eaten -> triggers snake length -> triggers player score -> player high score
 
  - operators, and values that flow through the data pipeline.

For example, the diagram could show the 
- input observables at the top, such as the 
  - user input from arrow keys, 
  - game ticks and then show how these observables 

- trigger changes and updates in other observables, 
  - position of the snake, 
  - snake length
  - player's score, and the 
  - players high score. 

- operator in the data pipeline could be represented by a box or node in the diagram, 
  with arrows connecting the nodes to

can you construct a mermaid diagram for a javascript reactive extensions snake game
Certainly, here is an example of a mermaid diagram for a JavaScript Reactive Extensions (RxJS) snake game:


graph LR
  A[Start] --> B[Initialize Game]
  B --> C[Create Snake]
  B --> D[Create Food]
  C --> E[Move Snake]
  E --> F[Check Collision]
  F -->|Yes| G[End Game]
  F -->|No| H[Update Score]
  D --> I[Generate Food] 
  E --> J[Update Snake Position]
  J --> K[Check If Snake Ate Food]
  K -->|Yes| L[Increase Snake Length]
  K -->|No| M[Do Not Increase Snake Length]
  L --> I
  M --> H

In this diagram, the game starts at node A and then moves to node B, where the game is initialized. 
The snake and food are created at nodes C and D, respectively. The snake then moves to node E, 
where its position is updated. The game checks for collisions at node F, and if a collision occurs, 
the game ends at node G. If no collision occurs, the score is updated at node H.

The food is generated at node I and the snake's length is increased at node L if it eats the food. 
If the snake does not eat the food, its length remains the same at node M.

This is just one example of how a mermaid diagram can be used to visualize the workflow of a 
JavaScript RxJS snake game. The specific details and nodes of the diagram may vary depending 
on the implementation and requirements of the game.

what do I need to create a mermaid diagram myself
To create a mermaid diagram, you need a few things:

Text editor: You can create a mermaid diagram using any text editor such as Notepad, Sublime Text, 
Visual Studio Code, etc.

Mermaid syntax: You need to learn the syntax of the mermaid language to create a diagram. 
Mermaid is a simple and intuitive syntax for generating diagrams, charts, and flowcharts. 
You can learn more about the syntax and available features from the mermaid documentation.

Mermaid library: You need to include the mermaid library in your HTML file to create the diagram. 
You can download the mermaid library from the mermaid website or include it directly from a CDN.

Once you have these things, you can start creating your diagram by writing the mermaid syntax in 
your text editor. When you're done, you can save the file with a .mmd extension and then include 
it in your HTML file using the mermaid library.

Alternatively, you can use a mermaid editor or online tool to create a mermaid diagram without 
needing to learn the syntax. There are many mermaid editors and online tools available that 
offer a user-friendly interface for creating mermaid diagrams. Some popular examples include 
Mermaid Live Editor, Draw.io, and Lucidchart.

graph TD
  A[Start Game] --> B[Create Snake]
  B --> C[Place Snake on Board]
  C --> D[Wait for Player Input]
  D -->|Arrow Keys| E[Move Snake]
  E --> F[Is Snake on Board?]
  F -->|Yes| G[Is Snake on Food?]
  G -->|Yes| H[Eat Food and Grow]
  G -->|No| I[Do Not Grow]
  H --> J[Update Score]
  F -->|No| K[Is Snake on Itself?]
  K -->|Yes| L[End Game]
  K -->|No| E

Stopwatch after Hladky with Adam Lubek on Stackblitz
---------------------------------------------------
/*
Stop Watch inspired by
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XKfhGntZROQ
*/
console.clear();
import { fromEvent, interval, merge, noop, NEVER } from 'rxjs';
import { map, mapTo, scan, startWith, switchMap, tap } from 'rxjs/operators';

interface State {
  count: boolean;
  countup: boolean;
  speed: number;
  value: number;
  increase: number;
}

const getElem = (id: string): HTMLElement => document.getElementById(id);
const getVal = (id: string): number => parseInt((getElem(id))['value']);
const fromClick = (id: string) => fromEvent(getElem(id), 'click');

const fromClickAndMapTo = (id: string, obj: {}) => fromClick(id).pipe(mapTo(obj));
const fromClickAndMap = (id: string, fn: (_) => {}) => fromClick(id).pipe(map(fn));

const setValue = (val: number) => getElem('counter').innerText = val.toString()

const events$ =
  merge(
    fromClickAndMapTo('start', { count: true }),
    fromClickAndMapTo('pause', { count: false }),
    fromClickAndMapTo('reset', { value: 0 }),
    fromClickAndMapTo('countup', { countup: true }),
    fromClickAndMapTo('countdown', { countup: false }),
    fromClickAndMap('setto', _ => ({ value: getVal('value') })),
    fromClickAndMap('setspeed', _ => ({ speed: getVal('speed') })),
    fromClickAndMap('setincrease', _ => ({ increase: getVal('increase') }))
  );

const stopWatch$ = events$.pipe(
  startWith({ count: false, speed: 1000, value: 0, countup: true, increase: 1 }),
  scan<State, State>((state: State, curr): State => ({ ...state, ...curr }), {} as State),
  tap((state: State) => setValue(state.value)),
  switchMap((state: State) => state.count
    ? interval(state.speed)
      .pipe(
        tap(_ => state.value += state.countup ? state.increase : -state.increase),
        tap(_ => setValue(state.value))
      )
    : NEVER)
);

stopWatch$.subscribe();


--------------------

which rxjs operators take only a function as input
--------------------------------------------------------------------
There are several RxJS operators that take only a function as input:

map: 
This operator takes a function that transforms each value emitted by the source observable 
and returns a new observable with the transformed values.

filter: 
This operator takes a function that evaluates each value emitted by the source observable 
and returns a new observable with only the values that meet the specified criteria.

scan: 
This operator takes a function that accumulates values emitted by the source observable over 
time and returns a new observable with the accumulated values.

reduce: 
This operator takes a function that accumulates values emitted by the source observable and 
returns a single, accumulated value when the source observable completes.

forEach: 
This operator takes a function that is called for each value emitted by the source observable 
and is typically used for side effects, such as logging or updating a user interface.

tap: 
This operator takes a function that is called for each value emitted by the source observable and 
allows for side effects without affecting the emitted values.

retry: 
This operator takes a function that determines whether or not to retry the source observable when 
an error occurs and can also take a second function that returns an observable to retry with.

These operators take a function as input and use it to transform, filter, or accumulate the values 
emitted by the source observable or to control how the observable behaves in response to errors or 
other events.

an rxjs operator is a combinator
Yes, an RxJS operator is a combinator. A combinator is a function or operation that takes one 
or more functions as input and returns a new function or operation that combines the input 
functions in some way.

In RxJS, an operator is a combinator that takes one or more observables as input and returns 
a new observable that combines or transforms the input observables in some way. For example, 
the merge operator takes multiple observables as input and returns a new observable that emits 
all values from all of the input observables in the order that they are emitted. 
The combineLatest operator takes multiple observables as input and returns a new observable 
that emits an array of the most recent values from all of the input observables whenever any 
of them emit a new value.

By using combinators like operators, developers can create more complex and dynamic data flows 
in their applications. These combinators allow for more modular and composable code that can 
be easily extended or modified over time, making it easier to maintain and update complex applications.

The role of a combinator is to take one or more functions or operations as input and combine them 
in some way to create a new function or operation that has different or more complex behavior than 
the original functions or operations.

In functional programming, combinators are used to create more complex and flexible programs by 
combining simpler functions or operations in novel ways. Combinators can be used to compose functions, 
transform data, or create new abstractions that simplify complex operations.

In RxJS, operators are examples of combinators that take one or more observables as input and combine 
them in different ways to create new observables with different behaviors. These operators can be used 
to filter, transform, or combine data streams in real-time, making it possible to create more reactive 
and dynamic applications.

Combinators can also be used in other programming paradigms, such as object-oriented programming or 
logic programming, to create more flexible and extensible programs. By using combinators, developers 
can create code that is easier to maintain, extend, and modify over time, allowing for more agile and 
responsive development.


which rxjs operators are made from simpler rxjs operators
-----------------------------------------------------------
Many RxJS operators are made from simpler RxJS operators, either by composing them together 
or by applying them in different ways. Here are some examples of RxJS operators that are made 
from simpler RxJS operators:

mergeMap: This operator is made from the merge operator and the map operator. It takes an observable 
as input and maps each emitted value to a new observable, then merges all of the emitted observables 
into a single observable.

switchMap: This operator is made from the switch operator and the map operator. It takes an observable 
as input and maps each emitted value to a new observable, then switches to the latest emitted observable 
and emits its values.

concatMap: This operator is made from the concat operator and the map operator. It takes an observable 
as input and maps each emitted value to a new observable, then concatenates all of the emitted 
observables into a single observable.

pluck: This operator is made from the map operator and the property access operator. It takes a 
property name as input and maps each emitted value to the value of that property.

debounceTime: This operator is made from the debounce operator and the timer operator. It delays 
the emission of values from the source observable until a certain amount of time has elapsed without 
any new values being emitted.

throttleTime: This operator is made from the throttle operator and the timer operator. It limits the 
rate at which values are emitted from the source observable by ignoring values emitted within a 
certain time period.

These operators are just a few examples of how RxJS operators can be combined or transformed to 
create new operators with different behaviors. By using these operators in different ways, developers 
can create more complex and dynamic data flows in their applications.

RxJS operators can be grouped into several categories 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
based on their functionality or behavior. Here are some common categories of RxJS operators:

Transformation operators: 
These operators transform the values emitted by the source observable in some way, 
such as map, filter, scan, and reduce.

Combination operators: 
These operators combine multiple observables into a single observable or create new observables 
based on combinations of values from the input observables, such as merge, concat, combineLatest, and zip.

Filtering operators: 
These operators filter the values emitted by the source observable based on some criteria, 
such as take, skip, distinct, and debounceTime.

Error handling operators: 
These operators handle errors that occur within the observable stream, such as 
catchError, retry, and finally.

Utility operators: 
These operators provide utility functions for working with observables, 
such as tap, delay, timeout, and toArray.

Creation operators: 
These operators create new observables from scratch, such as of, from, interval, and timer.

Multicasting operators: 
These operators allow multiple subscribers to share a single observable and its underlying subscription, 
such as share, publish, and refCount.

By grouping operators into categories, it becomes easier for developers to choose the right 
operators for their use case and to understand the behavior of the operators within the observable stream.




what 10 basic use cases can you see for beeing best handled with RxJs
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Real-time data processing: 
RxJS can be used to handle real-time data streams that require efficient processing and 
handling of asynchronous events, such as sensor data, user interactions, and network requests.

Reactive user interfaces: 
RxJS can be used to create reactive and dynamic user interfaces that respond to user actions 
in real-time, such as autocomplete fields, search bars, and drag-and-drop interactions.

Server-side streaming: 
RxJS can be used to handle server-side streaming of data, such as real-time analytics, 
log monitoring, and database updates.

Parallel processing: 
RxJS can be used to perform parallel processing of data streams, such as running multiple 
computations in parallel or processing multiple streams of data concurrently.

Animation and visual effects: 
RxJS can be used to handle animation and visual effects in web applications, such as transitions, 
scrolling effects, and visualizations.

Data synchronization: 
RxJS can be used to synchronize data between multiple sources, such as databases, APIs, 
and external services.

Error handling: 
RxJS can be used to handle errors and exceptions in real-time data streams, such as retrying 
failed requests, logging errors, and recovering from errors.

Data filtering and manipulation: 
RxJS can be used to filter and manipulate data streams based on various criteria, such as 
filtering by date, sorting by value, and transforming data between different formats.

Event-driven programming: RxJS can be used to handle event-driven programming, such as 
handling user input, responding to system events, and triggering actions based on external triggers.

Reactive testing: RxJS can be used to perform reactive testing of web applications, 
such as simulating user actions, testing asynchronous operations, and verifying the behavior 
of reactive components.

effects like latency, failure, backpressure and others. 
What other effects can you see best handeled with Rxjs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to latency, failure, and backpressure, there are several other effects that can 
be best handled with RxJS:

Cancellation: 
RxJS provides operators for canceling ongoing operations or subscriptions, 
such as takeUntil and unsubscribeOn, allowing for more efficient and responsive 
handling of user interactions.

Concurrency: 
RxJS provides operators for controlling concurrency within observables, 
such as concatMap, mergeMap, and switchMap, allowing for more efficient processing 
of multiple streams of data.

Throttling and debouncing: 
RxJS provides operators for throttling and debouncing data streams, 
allowing for more efficient use of system resources and improved performance.

Memory management: 
RxJS provides mechanisms for managing memory usage within observables, 
such as automatic reference counting and memory caching, allowing for more efficient use 
of system resources.

Composition and modularity: 
RxJS provides operators and abstractions for composing and 
modularizing complex data flows, allowing for more flexible and maintainable code.

Asynchronous control flow: RxJS provides operators for controlling the asynchronous 
control flow within observables, such as delay, timeout, and interval, allowing for 
more efficient and responsive handling of asynchronous events.

Custom operators: RxJS provides mechanisms for creating custom operators and abstractions 
tailored to specific use cases, allowing for more fine-grained control over 
the behavior of observables.

By providing these features and abstractions, RxJS makes it easier to handle 
complex data streams and effects within web applications, allowing developers to 
build more efficient, responsive, and flexible applications.

is state management also a possible rxjs use case

Yes, state management is also a possible use case for RxJS. In fact, many front-end frameworks 
and libraries, such as Angular and React, use RxJS for state management.

In this context, RxJS can be used to manage the state of a web application, allowing for more 
efficient and reactive handling of changes to the application state. For example, an observable 
can be used to represent the current state of the application, with various operators used to 
transform and manipulate the state based on user interactions or other events.

In addition, RxJS can be used to manage the flow of data between components and services within 
an application, allowing for more efficient and modular code. By providing a standardized 
mechanism for handling data streams and effects, RxJS can simplify the development of 
complex web applications and improve the overall performance and maintainability of the codebase.

could you give a sample of rxjs state mangement of a todo list
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

// Define an initial state for the todo list
const initialState = {
  todos: [],
  filter: 'all'
};

// Create a BehaviorSubject to represent the current state of the todo list
const todoListState = new BehaviorSubject(initialState);

// Define a function to add a new todo item to the list
function addTodoItem(text) {
  const currentTodos = todoListState.getValue().todos;
  const newTodoItem = { text, completed: false };
  const updatedTodos = [...currentTodos, newTodoItem];
  todoListState.next({ ...todoListState.getValue(), todos: updatedTodos });
}

// Define a function to update the completion status of a todo item
function updateTodoItem(id, completed) {
  const currentTodos = todoListState.getValue().todos;
  const updatedTodos = currentTodos.map(todo => {
    if (todo.id === id) {
      return { ...todo, completed };
    } else {
      return todo;
    }
  });
  todoListState.next({ ...todoListState.getValue(), todos: updatedTodos });
}

// Define a function to filter the todo list based on a given filter value
function filterTodoList(filter) {
  todoListState.next({ ...todoListState.getValue(), filter });
}

// Subscribe to changes in the todo list state
todoListState.subscribe(state => {
  // Render the todo list based on the current state
  renderTodoList(state.todos, state.filter);
});

// Add a new todo item to the list
addTodoItem('Buy groceries');

// Update the completion status of a todo item
updateTodoItem(1, true);

// Filter the todo list based on a given filter value
filterTodoList('completed');
In this example, a BehaviorSubject is used to represent the current state of the todo list. 
The state is initially set to an empty list of todos and a default filter value of 'all'. 
Three functions are defined to add new todo items, update the completion status of 
existing todo items, and filter the todo list based on a given filter value. 
These functions use the getValue() method to access the current state of the todo list, 
and the next() method to update the state with new values. The subscribe() method is used 
to listen for changes in the todo list state and render the todo list based on the current state. 

Finally, the addTodoItem(), updateTodoItem(), and filterTodoList() functions are called to add 
a new todo item, update the completion status of an existing item, and filter the todo list based 
on a given filter value, respectively.

Operators By Category
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating Observables
Operators that originate new Observables.

Create  create an Observable from scratch by calling observer methods programmatically
Defer  do not create the Observable until the observer subscribes, and create a fresh Observable for each observer
Empty/Never/Throw  create Observables that have very precise and limited behavior
From  convert some other object or data structure into an Observable
Interval  create an Observable that emits a sequence of integers spaced by a particular time interval
Just  convert an object or a set of objects into an Observable that emits that or those objects
Range  create an Observable that emits a range of sequential integers
Repeat  create an Observable that emits a particular item or sequence of items repeatedly
Start  create an Observable that emits the return value of a function
Timer  create an Observable that emits a single item after a given delay


Transforming Observables
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that transform items that are emitted by an Observable.

Buffer  periodically gather items from an Observable into bundles and emit these bundles 
rather than emitting the items one at a time
FlatMap  transform the items emitted by an Observable into Observables, then flatten the 
emissions from those into a single Observable
GroupBy  divide an Observable into a set of Observables that each emit a different group 
of items from the original Observable, organized by key
Map  transform the items emitted by an Observable by applying a function to each item
Scan  apply a function to each item emitted by an Observable, sequentially, and emit each 
successive value
Window  periodically subdivide items from an Observable into Observable windows and emit 
these windows rather than emitting the items one at a time


Filtering Observables
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that selectively emit items from a source Observable.

Debounce  only emit an item from an Observable if a particular timespan has passed without 
it emitting another item
Distinct  suppress duplicate items emitted by an Observable
ElementAt  emit only item n emitted by an Observable
Filter  emit only those items from an Observable that pass a predicate test
First  emit only the first item, or the first item that meets a condition, from an Observable
IgnoreElements  do not emit any items from an Observable but mirror its termination notification
Last  emit only the last item emitted by an Observable
Sample  emit the most recent item emitted by an Observable within periodic time intervals
Skip  suppress the first n items emitted by an Observable
SkipLast  suppress the last n items emitted by an Observable
Take  emit only the first n items emitted by an Observable
TakeLast  emit only the last n items emitted by an Observable


Combining Observables
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that work with multiple source Observables to create a single Observable

And/Then/When  combine sets of items emitted by two or more Observables by means of Pattern 
and Plan intermediaries
CombineLatest  when an item is emitted by either of two Observables, combine the latest item 
emitted by each Observable via a specified function and emit items based on the results of 
this function
Join  combine items emitted by two Observables whenever an item from one Observable is emitted 
during a time window defined according to an item emitted by the other Observable
Merge  combine multiple Observables into one by merging their emissions
StartWith  emit a specified sequence of items before beginning to emit the items from the 
source Observable
Switch  convert an Observable that emits Observables into a single Observable that emits 
the items emitted by the most-recently-emitted of those Observables
Zip  combine the emissions of multiple Observables together via a specified function and 
emit single items for each combination based on the results of this function


Error Handling Operators
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that help to recover from error notifications from an Observable

Catch  recover from an onError notification by continuing the sequence without error
Retry  if a source Observable sends an onError notification, resubscribe to it in the hopes 
that it will complete without error


Observable Utility Operators

A toolbox of useful Operators for working with Observables
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Delay  shift the emissions from an Observable forward in time by a particular amount
Do  register an action to take upon a variety of Observable lifecycle events
Materialize/Dematerialize  represent both the items emitted and the notifications sent as 
emitted items, or reverse this process
ObserveOn  specify the scheduler on which an observer will observe this Observable
Serialize  force an Observable to make serialized calls and to be well-behaved
Subscribe  operate upon the emissions and notifications from an Observable
SubscribeOn  specify the scheduler an Observable should use when it is subscribed to
TimeInterval  convert an Observable that emits items into one that emits indications of 
the amount of time elapsed between those emissions
Timeout  mirror the source Observable, but issue an error notification if a particular 
period of time elapses without any emitted items
Timestamp  attach a timestamp to each item emitted by an Observable
Using  create a disposable resource that has the same lifespan as the Observable

Conditional and Boolean Operators
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that evaluate one or more Observables or items emitted by Observables

All  determine whether all items emitted by an Observable meet some criteria
Amb  given two or more source Observables, emit all of the items from only the first of 
these Observables to emit an item
Contains  determine whether an Observable emits a particular item or not
DefaultIfEmpty  emit items from the source Observable, or a default item if the source Observable 
emits nothing
SequenceEqual  determine whether two Observables emit the same sequence of items
SkipUntil  discard items emitted by an Observable until a second Observable emits an item
SkipWhile  discard items emitted by an Observable until a specified condition becomes false
TakeUntil  discard items emitted by an Observable after a second Observable emits an item 
or terminates
TakeWhile  discard items emitted by an Observable after a specified condition becomes false


Mathematical and Aggregate Operators
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operators that operate on the entire sequence of items emitted by an Observable

Average  calculates the average of numbers emitted by an Observable and emits this average
Concat  emit the emissions from two or more Observables without interleaving them
Count  count the number of items emitted by the source Observable and emit only this value
Max  determine, and emit, the maximum-valued item emitted by an Observable
Min  determine, and emit, the minimum-valued item emitted by an Observable
Reduce  apply a function to each item emitted by an Observable, sequentially, and emit the 
final value
Sum  calculate the sum of numbers emitted by an Observable and emit this sum
Backpressure Operators
backpressure operators  strategies for coping with Observables that produce items more rapidly 
than their observers consume them

Connectable Observable Operators
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specialty Observables that have more precisely-controlled subscription dynamics

Connect  instruct a connectable Observable to begin emitting items to its subscribers
Publish  convert an ordinary Observable into a connectable Observable
RefCount  make a Connectable Observable behave like an ordinary Observable
Replay  ensure that all observers see the same sequence of emitted items, even if they subscribe 
after the Observable has begun emitting items
Operators to Convert Observables
To  convert an Observable into another object or data structure

A Decision Tree of Observable Operators
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This tree can help you find the ReactiveX Observable operator youre looking for.

I want to create a new Observable that emits a particular item --- 		Just

that was returned from a function called at subscribe-time ---			Start 

that was returned from an Action, ---						Callable, Runnable,...

called at subscribe-time From after a specified delay ---			Timer

that pulls its emissions from a particular Array, Iterable, ---			From
by retrieving it from a Future ---						From
 
Start that obtains its sequence from a Future From

that emits a sequence of items repeatedly ---					Repeat

from scratch, with custom logic 						new Observable(observer) 

that subscribes 								Defer
that emits a sequence of integers 						Range
at particular intervals of time                       				Interval
after a specified delay								Timer

that completes without emitting items 						Empty

that does nothing at all
										Never
I want to create an Observable by combining other Observables
and emitting all of the items from all of the Observables in whatever order 	Merge

and emitting all of the items from all of the Observables, one at a time 	Concat									Concatby combining the items from two or more Observables sequentially to come up with 

new items to emit whenever each of the Observables has emitted a new item	Zip

whenever any of the Observables has emitted a new item				CombineLatest

whenever an item is emitted by one Observable in a window 
defined by an item emitted by another						Join

by means of Pattern and Plan intermediariesAnd/Then/When
and emitting the items from only the most-recently emitted of Observables	Switch

I want to emit the items from an Observable after transforming them
one at a time with a function							Map

by emitting all of the items emitted by corresponding Observables		FlatMap

one Observable at a time, in the order they are emitted				ConcatMap

based on all of the items that preceded them					Scanby 

attaching a timestamp to them							Timestamp

into an indicator of the amount of time that lapsed before the emission of the 	itemTimeInterval

I want to shift the items emitted by an Observable forward in time before 	themDelay

I want to transform items and notifications from an Observable into items 
and reemit themby wrapping them in Notification objects				Materialize

which I can then unwrap again with						Dematerialize

I want to ignore all items emitted by an Observable and only pass 
along its completed/error notification						IgnoreElements

I want to mirror an Observable but prefix items to its sequence			StartWith
only if its sequence is 							emptyDefaultIfEmpty

I want to collect items from an Observable and reemit them as buffers of items	Buffer
containing only the last items emitted						TakeLastBuffer

I want to split one Observable into multiple Observables			Window

so that similar items end up on the same Observable				GroupBy
I want to retrieve a particular item emitted by an Observable:
the last item emitted before it completed					Last

the sole item it emitted 							Single

the first item it 								emittedFirst

I want to reemit only certain items from an Observable
by filtering out those that do not match some predicateFilterthat is, 
only the first item								First

that is, only the first itemsTakethat is, only the last item			Last

that is, only item nElementAtthat is,only those items after the first items

that is, after the first n items						Skip

that is, until one of those items matches a predicate				SkipWhile

that is, after an initial period of time					Skip

that is, after a second O observable emits an item				SkipUntil

that is, those items except the last items

that is, except the last n items						SkipLast

that is, until one of those items matches a predicate				TakeWhile

that is, except items emitted during a period of time before the source 
completes									SkipLast

that is, except items emitted after a second Observable emits an item		TakeUntil

by sampling the Observable periodically 					Sampleby 

only emitting items that are not followed by other items within some duration	Debounceby 

suppressing items that are duplicates of already-emitted items			Distinct

if they immediately follow the item they are duplicates of			DistinctUntilChanged

by delaying my subscription to it for some time after it begins emitting items	DelaySubscription

I want to reemit items from an Observable only on condition 
that it was the first of a collection of Observables to emit an item		Amb

I want to evaluate the entire sequence of items emitted by an Observable
and emit a single boolean indicating if all of the items pass some test		All

and emit a single boolean indicating if the Observable emitted any item 
(that passes some test)								Contains

and emit a single boolean indicating if the Observable emitted no items		IsEmpty

and emit a single boolean indicating if the sequence is identical to 
one emitted by a second Observable 						SequenceEqual

and emit the average of all of their values					Average

and emit the sum of all of their values						Sum

and emit a number indicating how many items were in the sequence		Count

and emit the item with the maximum value					Max

and emit the item with the minimum value					Min

by applying an aggregation function to each item in turn and emitting 		Scan

I want to convert the entire sequence of items emitted by an Observable 
into some other data structure							To

I want an operator to operate on a particular Scheduler				SubscribeOn
when it notifies 								observersObserveOn

I want an Observable to invoke a particular action when certain events occur	Tap

I want an Observable that will notify observers of an error			Throw

if a specified period of time elapses without it emitting an item		Timeout

I want an Observable to recover gracefully from a timeout by switching 
to a backup Observable								Timeoutfrom 

an upstream error 								notificationCatch
by attempting to resubscribe to the upstream 					ObservableRetry

I want to create a resource that has the same lifespan as 
the Observable									Using

I want to subscribe to an Observable and receive a Future 
that blocks until the Observable completes					Start

I want an Observable that does not start items to subscribers until asked	Publish

and then only emits the last item in its sequence				PublishLast

and then emits the complete sequence, even to those who subscribe after 
the sequence has begun								Replay

but I want it to go away once all of its subscribers unsubscribe		RefCount

and then I want to ask it to start						Connect




